The Tomb
(1917)
In relating the circumstances which have led to my confinement within this refuge for the
demented, I am aware that my present position will create a natural doubt of the authenticity
of my narrative. It is an unfortunate fact that the bulk of humanity is too limited in its mental
vision to weigh with patience and intelligence those isolated phenomena, seen and felt only
by a psychologically sensitive few, which lie outside its common experience. Men of broader
intellect know that there is no sharp distinction betwixt the real and the unreal; that all things
appear as they do only by virtue of the delicate individual physical and mental media through
which we are made conscious of them; but the prosaic materialism of the majority condemns
as madness the flashes of super-sight which penetrate the common veil of obvious
empiricism.
My name is Jervas Dudley, and from earliest childhood I have been a dreamer and a
visionary. Wealthy beyond the necessity of a commercial life, and temperamentally unfitted for
the formal studies and social recreations of my acquaintances, I have dwelt ever in realms
apart from the visible world; spending my youth and adolescence in ancient and little-known
books, and in roaming the fields and groves of the region near my ancestral home. I do not
think that what I read in these books or saw in these fields and groves was exactly what other
boys read and saw there; but of this I must say little, since detailed speech would but confirm
those cruel slanders upon my intellect which I sometimes overhear from the whispers of the
stealthy attendants around me. It is sufficient for me to relate events without analysing
causes.
I have said that I dwelt apart from the visible world, but I have not said that I dwelt alone. This
no human creature may do; for lacking the fellowship of the living, he inevitably draws upon
the companionship of things that are not, or are no longer, living. Close by my home there lies
a singular wooded hollow, in whose twilight deeps I spent most of my time; reading, thinking,
and dreaming. Down its moss-covered slopes my first steps of infancy were taken, and
around its grotesquely gnarled oak trees my first fancies of boyhood were woven. Well did I
come to know the presiding dryads of those trees, and often have I watched their wild dances
in the struggling beams of a waning moon—but of these things I must not now speak. I will tell
only of the lone tomb in the darkest of the hillside thickets; the deserted tomb of the Hydes, an
old and exalted family whose last direct descendant had been laid within its black recesses
many decades before my birth.
The vault to which I refer is of ancient granite, weathered and discoloured by the mists and
dampness of generations. Excavated back into the hillside, the structure is visible only at the
entrance. The door, a ponderous and forbidding slab of stone, hangs upon rusted iron hinges,
and is fastened ajar in a queerly sinister way by means of heavy iron chains and padlocks,
according to a gruesome fashion of half a century ago. The abode of the race whose scions
are here inurned had once crowned the declivity which holds the tomb, but had long since
fallen victim to the flames which sprang up from a disastrous stroke of lightning. Of the
midnight storm which destroyed this gloomy mansion, the older inhabitants of the region
sometimes speak in hushed and uneasy voices; alluding to what they call ―divine wrath‖ in a
manner that in later years vaguely increased the always strong fascination which I felt for the
forest-darkened sepulchre. One man only had perished in the fire. When the last of the Hydes
was buried in this place of shade and stillness, the sad urnful of ashes had come from a
distant land; to which the family had repaired when the mansion burned down. No one
remains to lay flowers before the granite portal, and few care to brave the depressing
shadows which seem to linger strangely about the water-worn stones.
I shall never forget the afternoon when first I stumbled upon the half-hidden house of death. It
was in mid-summer, when the alchemy of Nature transmutes the sylvan landscape to one
vivid and almost homogeneous mass of green; when the senses are well-nigh intoxicated with
the surging seas of moist verdure and the subtly indefinable odours of the soil and the
vegetation. In such surroundings the mind loses its perspective; time and space become
trivial and unreal, and echoes of a forgotten prehistoric past beat insistently upon the
enthralled consciousness. All day I had been wandering through the mystic groves of the
hollow; thinking thoughts I need not discuss, and conversing with things I need not name. In
years a child of ten, I had seen and heard many wonders unknown to the throng; and was
oddly aged in certain respects. When, upon forcing my way between two savage clumps of
briers, I suddenly encountered the entrance of the vault, I had no knowledge of what I had
discovered. The dark blocks of granite, the door so curiously ajar, and the funereal carvings
above the arch, aroused in me no associations of mournful or terrible character. Of graves
and tombs I knew and imagined much, but had on account of my peculiar temperament been
kept from all personal contact with churchyards and cemeteries. The strange stone house on
the woodland slope was to me only a source of interest and speculation; and its cold, damp
interior, into which I vainly peered through the aperture so tantalisingly left, contained for me
no hint of death or decay. But in that instant of curiosity was born the madly unreasoning
desire which has brought me to this hell of confinement. Spurred on by a voice which must
have come from the hideous soul of the forest, I resolved to enter the beckoning gloom in
spite of the ponderous chains which barred my passage. In the waning light of day I
alternately rattled the rusty impediments with a view to throwing wide the stone door, and
essayed to squeeze my slight form through the space already provided; but neither plan met
with success. At first curious, I was now frantic; and when in the thickening twilight I returned
to my home, I had sworn to the hundred gods of the grove that at any cost I would some day
force an entrance to the black, chilly depths that seemed calling out to me. The physician with
the iron-grey beard who comes each day to my room once told a visitor that this decision
marked the beginning of a pitiful monomania; but I will leave final judgment to my readers
when they shall have learnt all.
The months following my discovery were spent in futile attempts to force the complicated
padlock of the slightly open vault, and in carefully guarded inquiries regarding the nature and
history of the structure. With the traditionally receptive ears of the small boy, I learned much;
though an habitual secretiveness caused me to tell no one of my information or my resolve. It
is perhaps worth mentioning that I was not at all surprised or terrified on learning of the nature
of the vault. My rather original ideas regarding life and death had caused me to associate the
cold clay with the breathing body in a vague fashion; and I felt that the great and sinister
family of the burned-down mansion was in some way represented within the stone space I
sought to explore. Mumbled tales of the weird rites and godless revels of bygone years in the
ancient hall gave to me a new and potent interest in the tomb, before whose door I would sit
for hours at a time each day. Once I thrust a candle within the nearly closed entrance, but
could see nothing save a flight of damp stone steps leading downward. The odour of the
place repelled yet bewitched me. I felt I had known it before, in a past remote beyond all
recollection; beyond even my tenancy of the body I now possess.
The year after I first beheld the tomb, I stumbled upon a worm-eaten translation of Plutarch‘s
Lives in the book-filled attic of my home. Reading the life of Theseus, I was much impressed
by that passage telling of the great stone beneath which the boyish hero was to find his
tokens of destiny whenever he should become old enough to lift its enormous weight. This
legend had the effect of dispelling my keenest impatience to enter the vault, for it made me
feel that the time was not yet ripe. Later, I told myself, I should grow to a strength and
ingenuity which might enable me to unfasten the heavily chained door with ease; but until
then I would do better by conforming to what seemed the will of Fate.
Accordingly my watches by the dank portal became less persistent, and much of my time was
spent in other though equally strange pursuits. I would sometimes rise very quietly in the
night, stealing out to walk in those churchyards and places of burial from which I had been
kept by my parents. What I did there I may not say, for I am not now sure of the reality of
certain things; but I know that on the day after such a nocturnal ramble I would often astonish
those about me with my knowledge of topics almost forgotten for many generations. It was
after a night like this that I shocked the community with a queer conceit about the burial of the
rich and celebrated Squire Brewster, a maker of local history who was interred in 1711, and
whose slate headstone, bearing a graven skull and crossbones, was slowly crumbling to
powder. In a moment of childish imagination I vowed not only that the undertaker, Goodman
Simpson, had stolen the silver-buckled shoes, silken hose, and satin small-clothes of the
deceased before burial; but that the Squire himself, not fully inanimate, had turned twice in his
mound-covered coffin on the day after interment.
But the idea of entering the tomb never left my thoughts; being indeed stimulated by the
unexpected genealogical discovery that my own maternal ancestry possessed at least a slight
link with the supposedly extinct family of the Hydes. Last of my paternal race, I was likewise
the last of this older and more mysterious line. I began to feel that the tomb was mine, and to
look forward with hot eagerness to the time when I might pass within that stone door and
down those slimy stone steps in the dark. I now formed the habit of listening very intently at
the slightly open portal, choosing my favourite hours of midnight stillness for the odd vigil. By
the time I came of age, I had made a small clearing in the thicket before the mould-stained
facade of the hillside, allowing the surrounding vegetation to encircle and overhang the space
like the walls and roof of a sylvan bower. This bower was my temple, the fastened door my
shrine, and here I would lie outstretched on the mossy ground, thinking strange thoughts and
dreaming strange dreams.
The night of the first revelation was a sultry one. I must have fallen asleep from fatigue, for it
was with a distinct sense of awakening that I heard the voices. Of those tones and accents I
hesitate to speak; of their quality I will not speak; but I may say that they presented certain
uncanny differences in vocabulary, pronunciation, and mode of utterance. Every shade of
New England dialect, from the uncouth syllables of the Puritan colonists to the precise rhetoric
of fifty years ago, seemed represented in that shadowy colloquy, though it was only later that I
noticed the fact. At the time, indeed, my attention was distracted from this matter by another
phenomenon; a phenomenon so fleeting that I could not take oath upon its reality. I barely
fancied that as I awoke, a light had been hurriedly extinguished within the sunken sepulchre. I
do not think I was either astounded or panic-stricken, but I know that I was greatly and
permanently changed that night. Upon returning home I went with much directness to a rotting
chest in the attic, wherein I found the key which next day unlocked with ease the barrier I had
so long stormed in vain.
It was in the soft glow of late afternoon that I first entered the vault on the abandoned slope. A
spell was upon me, and my heart leaped with an exultation I can but ill describe. As I closed
the door behind me and descended the dripping steps by the light of my lone candle, I
seemed to know the way; and though the candle sputtered with the stifling reek of the place, I
felt singularly at home in the musty, charnel-house air. Looking about me, I beheld many
marble slabs bearing coffins, or the remains of coffins. Some of these were sealed and intact,
but others had nearly vanished, leaving the silver handles and plates isolated amidst certain
curious heaps of whitish dust. Upon one plate I read the name of Sir Geoffrey Hyde, who had
come from Sussex in 1640 and died here a few years later. In a conspicuous alcove was one
fairly well-preserved and untenanted casket, adorned with a single name which brought to me
both a smile and a shudder. An odd impulse caused me to climb upon the broad slab,
extinguish my candle, and lie down within the vacant box.
In the grey light of dawn I staggered from the vault and locked the chain of the door behind
me. I was no longer a young man, though but twenty-one winters had chilled my bodily frame.
Early-rising villagers who observed my homeward progress looked at me strangely, and
marvelled at the signs of ribald revelry which they saw in one whose life was known to be
sober and solitary. I did not appear before my parents till after a long and refreshing sleep.
Henceforward I haunted the tomb each night; seeing, hearing, and doing things I must never
reveal. My speech, always susceptible to environmental influences, was the first thing to
succumb to the change; and my suddenly acquired archaism of diction was soon remarked
upon. Later a queer boldness and recklessness came into my demeanour, till I unconsciously
grew to possess the bearing of a man of the world despite my lifelong seclusion. My formerly
silent tongue waxed voluble with the easy grace of a Chesterfield or the godless cynicism of a
Rochester. I displayed a peculiar erudition utterly unlike the fantastic, monkish lore over which
I had pored in youth; and covered the flyleaves of my books with facile impromptu epigrams
which brought up suggestions of Gay, Prior, and the sprightliest of the Augustan wits and
rimesters. One morning at breakfast I came close to disaster by declaiming in palpably
liquorish accents an effusion of eighteenth-century Bacchanalian mirth; a bit of Georgian
playfulness never recorded in a book, which ran something like this:
Come hither, my lads, with your tankards of ale,
And drink to the present before it shall fail;
Pile each on your platter a mountain of beef,
For ‘tis eating and drinking that bring us relief:
So fill up your glass,
For life will soon pass;
When you‘re dead ye‘ll ne‘er drink to your king or your lass!
Anacreon had a red nose, so they say;
But what‘s a red nose if ye‘re happy and gay?
Gad split me! I‘d rather be red whilst I‘m here,
Than white as a lily—and dead half a year!
So Betty, my miss,
Come give me a kiss;
In hell there‘s no innkeeper‘s daughter like this!
Young Harry, propp‘d up just as straight as he‘s able,
Will soon lose his wig and slip under the table;
But fill up your goblets and pass ‘em around—
Better under the table than under the ground!
So revel and chaff
As ye thirstily quaff:
Under six feet of dirt ‘tis less easy to laugh!
The fiend strike me blue! I‘m scarce able to walk,
And damn me if I can stand upright or talk!
Here, landlord, bid Betty to summon a chair;
I‘ll try home for a while, for my wife is not there!
So lend me a hand;
I‘m not able to stand,
But I‘m gay whilst I linger on top of the land!
About this time I conceived my present fear of fire and thunderstorms. Previously indifferent to
such things, I had now an unspeakable horror of them; and would retire to the innermost
recesses of the house whenever the heavens threatened an electrical display. A favourite
haunt of mine during the day was the ruined cellar of the mansion that had burned down, and
in fancy I would picture the structure as it had been in its prime. On one occasion I startled a
villager by leading him confidently to a shallow sub-cellar, of whose existence I seemed to
know in spite of the fact that it had been unseen and forgotten for many generations.
At last came that which I had long feared. My parents, alarmed at the altered manner and
appearance of their only son, commenced to exert over my movements a kindly espionage
which threatened to result in disaster. I had told no one of my visits to the tomb, having
guarded my secret purpose with religious zeal since childhood; but now I was forced to
exercise care in threading the mazes of the wooded hollow, that I might throw off a possible
pursuer. My key to the vault I kept suspended from a cord about my neck, its presence known
only to me. I never carried out of the sepulchre any of the things I came upon whilst within its
walls.
One morning as I emerged from the damp tomb and fastened the chain of the portal with
none too steady hand, I beheld in an adjacent thicket the dreaded face of a watcher. Surely
the end was near; for my bower was discovered, and the objective of my nocturnal journeys
revealed. The man did not accost me, so I hastened home in an effort to overhear what he
might report to my careworn father. Were my sojourns beyond the chained door about to be
proclaimed to the world? Imagine my delighted astonishment on hearing the spy inform my
parent in a cautious whisper that I had spent the night in the bower outside the tomb; my
sleep-filmed eyes fixed upon the crevice where the padlocked portal stood ajar! By what
miracle had the watcher been thus deluded? I was now convinced that a supernatural agency
protected me. Made bold by this heaven-sent circumstance, I began to resume perfect
openness in going to the vault; confident that no one could witness my entrance. For a week I
tasted to the full the joys of that charnel conviviality which I must not describe, when the thing
happened, and I was borne away to this accursed abode of sorrow and monotony.
I should not have ventured out that night; for the taint of thunder was in the clouds, and a
hellish phosphorescence rose from the rank swamp at the bottom of the hollow. The call of
the dead, too, was different. Instead of the hillside tomb, it was the charred cellar on the crest
of the slope whose presiding daemon beckoned to me with unseen fingers. As I emerged
from an intervening grove upon the plain before the ruin, I beheld in the misty moonlight a
thing I had always vaguely expected. The mansion, gone for a century, once more reared its
stately height to the raptured vision; every window ablaze with the splendour of many
candles. Up the long drive rolled the coaches of the Boston gentry, whilst on foot came a
numerous assemblage of powdered exquisites from the neighbouring mansions. With this
throng I mingled, though I knew I belonged with the hosts rather than with the guests. Inside
the hall were music, laughter, and wine on every hand. Several faces I recognised; though I
should have known them better had they been shrivelled or eaten away by death and
decomposition. Amidst a wild and reckless throng I was the wildest and most abandoned. Gay
blasphemy poured in torrents from my lips, and in my shocking sallies I heeded no law of
God, Man, or Nature. Suddenly a peal of thunder, resonant even above the din of the swinish
revelry, clave the very roof and laid a hush of fear upon the boisterous company. Red tongues
of flame and searing gusts of heat engulfed the house; and the roysterers, struck with terror at
the descent of a calamity which seemed to transcend the bounds of unguided Nature, fled
shrieking into the night. I alone remained, riveted to my seat by a grovelling fear which I had
never felt before. And then a second horror took possession of my soul. Burnt alive to ashes,
my body dispersed by the four winds, I might never lie in the tomb of the Hydes! Was not my
coffin prepared for me? Had I not a right to rest till eternity amongst the descendants of Sir
Geoffrey Hyde? Aye! I would claim my heritage of death, even though my soul go seeking
through the ages for another corporeal tenement to represent it on that vacant slab in the
alcove of the vault. Jervas Hyde should never share the sad fate of Palinurus!
As the phantom of the burning house faded, I found myself screaming and struggling madly in
the arms of two men, one of whom was the spy who had followed me to the tomb. Rain was
pouring down in torrents, and upon the southern horizon were flashes of the lightning that had
so lately passed over our heads. My father, his face lined with sorrow, stood by as I shouted
my demands to be laid within the tomb; frequently admonishing my captors to treat me as
gently as they could. A blackened circle on the floor of the ruined cellar told of a violent stroke
from the heavens; and from this spot a group of curious villagers with lanterns were prying a
small box of antique workmanship which the thunderbolt had brought to light. Ceasing my
futile and now objectless writhing, I watched the spectators as they viewed the treasure-trove,
and was permitted to share in their discoveries. The box, whose fastenings were broken by
the stroke which had unearthed it, contained many papers and objects of value; but I had
eyes for one thing alone. It was the porcelain miniature of a young man in a smartly curled
bag-wig, and bore the initials ―J. H.‖ The face was such that as I gazed, I might well have
been studying my mirror.
On the following day I was brought to this room with the barred windows, but I have been kept
informed of certain things through an aged and simple-minded servitor, for whom I bore a
fondness in infancy, and who like me loves the churchyard. What I have dared relate of my
experiences within the vault has brought me only pitying smiles. My father, who visits me
frequently, declares that at no time did I pass the chained portal, and swears that the rusted
padlock had not been touched for fifty years when he examined it. He even says that all the
village knew of my journeys to the tomb, and that I was often watched as I slept in the bower
outside the grim facade, my half-open eyes fixed on the crevice that leads to the interior.
Against these assertions I have no tangible proof to offer, since my key to the padlock was
lost in the struggle on that night of horrors. The strange things of the past which I learnt during
those nocturnal meetings with the dead he dismisses as the fruits of my lifelong and
omnivorous browsing amongst the ancient volumes of the family library. Had it not been for
my old servant Hiram, I should have by this time become quite convinced of my madness.
But Hiram, loyal to the last, has held faith in me, and has done that which impels me to make
public at least a part of my story. A week ago he burst open the lock which chains the door of
the tomb perpetually ajar, and descended with a lantern into the murky depths. On a slab in
an alcove he found an old but empty coffin whose tarnished plate bears the single word
―Jervas”. In that coffin and in that vault they have promised me I shall be buried.with great difficulty; and could prove it by the fact that he had been forced to type all his
recent letters, even those to his father and mother, who would bear out the assertion.
What made the investigators pause in confusion was not this circumstance alone, for that was
nothing unprecedented or fundamentally suspicious; nor even the Pawtuxet gossip, of which
one or two of them had caught echoes. It was the muddled discourse of the young man which
nonplussed them, implying as it did a virtually total loss of memory concerning important
monetary matters which he had had at his fingertips only a month or two before. Something
was wrong; for despite the apparent coherence and rationality of his speech, there could be
no normal reason for this ill-concealed blankness on vital points. Moreover, although none of
these men knew Ward well, they could not help observing the change in his language and
manner. They had heard he was an antiquarian, but even the most hopeless antiquarians do
not make daily use of obsolete phraseology and gestures. Altogether, this combination of
hoarseness, palsied hands, bad memory, and altered speech and bearing must represent
some disturbance or malady of genuine gravity, which no doubt formed the basis of the
prevailing odd rumours; and after their departure the party of officials decided that a talk with
the senior Ward was imperative.
So on the sixth of March, 1928, there was a long and serious conference in Mr. Ward‘s office,
after which the utterly bewildered father summoned Dr. Willett in a kind of helpless
resignation. Willett looked over the strained and awkward signatures of the cheques, and
compared them in his mind with the penmanship of that last frantic note. Certainly, the change
was radical and profound, and yet there was something damnably familiar about the new
writing. It had crabbed and archaic tendencies of a very curious sort, and seemed to result
from a type of stroke utterly different from that which the youth had always used. It was
strange—but where had he seen it before? On the whole, it was obvious that Charles was
insane. Of that there could be no doubt. And since it appeared unlikely that he could handle
his property or continue to deal with the outside world much longer, something must quickly
be done toward his oversight and possible cure. It was then that the alienists were called in,
Drs. Peck and Waite of Providence and Dr. Lyman of Boston, to whom Mr. Ward and Dr.
Willett gave the most exhaustive possible history of the case, and who conferred at length in
the now unused library of their young patient, examining what books and papers of his were
left in order to gain some further notion of his habitual mental cast. After scanning this material
and examining the ominous note to Willett they all agreed that Charles Ward‘s studies had
been enough to unseat or at least to warp any ordinary intellect, and wished most heartily that
they could see his more intimate volumes and documents; but this latter they knew they could
do, if at all, only after a scene at the bungalow itself. Willett now reviewed the whole case with
febrile energy; it being at this time that he obtained the statements of the workmen who had
seen Charles find the Curwen documents, and that he collated the incidents of the destroyed
newspaper items, looking up the latter at the Journal office.
On Thursday, the eighth of March, Drs. Willett, Peck, Lyman, and Waite, accompanied by Mr.
Ward, paid the youth their momentous call; making no concealment of their object and
questioning the now acknowledged patient with extreme minuteness. Charles, though he was
inordinately long in answering the summons and was still redolent of strange and noxious
laboratory odours when he did finally make his agitated appearance, proved a far from
recalcitrant subject; and admitted freely that his memory and balance had suffered somewhat
from close application to abstruse studies. He offered no resistance when his removal to other
quarters was insisted upon; and seemed, indeed, to display a high degree of intelligence as
apart from mere memory. His conduct would have sent his interviewers away in bafflement
had not the persistently archaic trend of his speech and unmistakable replacement of modern
by ancient ideas in his consciousness marked him out as one definitely removed from the
normal. Of his work he would say no more to the group of doctors than he had formerly said
to his family and to Dr. Willett, and his frantic note of the previous month he dismissed as
mere nerves and hysteria. He insisted that this shadowy bungalow possessed no library or
laboratory beyond the visible ones, and waxed abstruse in explaining the absence from the
house of such odours as now saturated all his clothing. Neighbourhood gossip he attributed to
nothing more than the cheap inventiveness of baffled curiosity. Of the whereabouts of Dr.
Allen he said he did not feel at liberty to speak definitely, but assured his inquisitors that the
bearded and spectacled man would return when needed. In paying off the stolid Brava who
resisted all questioning by the visitors, and in closing the bungalow which still seemed to hold
such nighted secrets, Ward shewed no sign of nervousness save a barely noticed tendency to
pause as though listening for something very faint. He was apparently animated by a calmly
philosophic resignation, as if his removal were the merest transient incident which would
cause the least trouble if facilitated and disposed of once and for all. It was clear that he
trusted to his obviously unimpaired keenness of absolute mentality to overcome all the
embarrassments into which his twisted memory, his lost voice and handwriting, and his
secretive and eccentric behaviour had led him. His mother, it was agreed, was not to be told
of the change; his father supplying typed notes in his name. Ward was taken to the restfully
and picturesquely situated private hospital maintained by Dr. Waite on Conanicut Island in the
bay, and subjected to the closest scrutiny and questioning by all the physicians connected
with the case. It was then that the physical oddities were noticed; the slackened metabolism,
the altered skin, and the disproportionate neural reactions. Dr. Willett was the most perturbed
of the various examiners, for he had attended Ward all his life and could appreciate with
terrible keenness the extent of his physical disorganisation. Even the familiar olive mark on
his hip was gone, while on his chest was a great black mole or cicatrice which had never
been there before, and which made Willett wonder whether the youth had ever submitted to
any of the ―witch markings‖ reputed to be inflicted at certain unwholesome nocturnal meetings
in wild and lonely places. The doctor could not keep his mind off a certain transcribed witch-
trial record from Salem which Charles had shewn him in the old non-secretive days, and
which read: ―Mr. G. B. on that Nighte putt ye Divell his Marke upon Bridget S., Jonathan A.,
Simon O., Deliverance W., Joseph C., Susan P., Mehitable C., and Deborah B.‖ Ward‘s face,
too, troubled him horribly, till at length he suddenly discovered why he was horrified. For
above the young man‘s right eye was something which he had never previously noticed—a
small scar or pit precisely like that in the crumbled painting of old Joseph Curwen, and
perhaps attesting some hideous ritualistic inoculation to which both had submitted at a certain
stage of their occult careers.
While Ward himself was puzzling all the doctors at the hospital a very strict watch was kept on
all mail addressed either to him or to Dr. Allen, which Mr. Ward had ordered delivered at the
family home. Willett had predicted that very little would be found, since any communications
of a vital nature would probably have been exchanged by messenger; but in the latter part of
March there did come a letter from Prague for Dr. Allen which gave both the doctor and the
father deep thought. It was in a very crabbed and archaic hand; and though clearly not the
effort of a foreigner, shewed almost as singular a departure from modern English as the
speech of young Ward himself. It read:
Kleinstrasse 11,
Altstadt, Prague,
11th Feby. 1928.
Brother in Almousin-Metraton:—
I this day receiv‘d yr mention of what came up from the Salts I sent you. It was
wrong, and meanes clearly that ye Headstones had been chang‘d when Barnabas
gott me the Specimen. It is often so, as you must be sensible of from the Thing you
gott from ye Kings Chapell ground in 1769 and what H. gott from Olde Bury‘g Point
in 1690, that was like to ende him. I gott such a Thing in Aegypt 75 yeares gone,
from the which came that Scar ye Boy saw on me here in 1924. As I told you longe
ago, do not calle up That which you can not put downe; either from dead Saltes or
out of ye Spheres beyond. Have ye Wordes for laying at all times readie, and stopp
not to be sure when there is any Doubte of Whom you have. Stones are all chang‘d
now in Nine groundes out of 10. You are never sure till you question. I this day
heard from H., who has had Trouble with the Soldiers. He is like to be sorry
Transylvania is pass‘d from Hungary to Roumania, and wou‘d change his Seat if
the Castel weren‘t so fulle of What we Knowe. But of this he hath doubtless writ
you. In my next Send‘g there will be Somewhat from a Hill tomb from ye East that
will delight you greatly. Meanwhile forget not I am desirous of B. F. if you can
possibly get him for me. You know G. in Philada. better than I. Have him up firste if
you will, but doe not use him soe hard he will be Difficult, for I must speake to him
in ye End.
Yogg-Sothoth Neblod Zin
Simon O.
To Mr. J. C. in
Providence.
Mr. Ward and Dr. Willett paused in utter chaos before this apparent bit of unrelieved insanity.
Only by degrees did they absorb what it seemed to imply. So the absent Dr. Allen, and not
Charles Ward, had come to be the leading spirit at Pawtuxet? That must explain the wild
reference and denunciation in the youth‘s last frantic letter. And what of this addressing of the
bearded and spectacled stranger as ―Mr. J. C.‖? There was no escaping the inference, but
there are limits to possible monstrosity. Who was ―Simon O.‖; the old man Ward had visited in
Prague four years previously? Perhaps, but in the centuries behind there had been another
Simon O.—Simon Orne, alias Jedediah, of Salem, who vanished in 1771, and whose peculiar
handwriting Dr. Willett now unmistakably recognised from the photostatic copies of the Orne
formulae which Charles had once shewn him. What horrors and mysteries, what
contradictions and contraventions of Nature, had come back after a century and a half to
harass Old Providence with her clustered spires and domes?
The father and the old physician, virtually at a loss what to do or think, went to see Charles at
the hospital and questioned him as delicately as they could about Dr. Allen, about the Prague
visit, and about what he had learned of Simon or Jedediah Orne of Salem. To all these
inquiries the youth was politely non-committal, merely barking in his hoarse whisper that he
had found Dr. Allen to have a remarkable spiritual rapport with certain souls from the past, and
that any correspondent the bearded man might have in Prague would probably be similarly
gifted. When they left, Mr. Ward and Dr. Willett realised to their chagrin that they had really
been the ones under catechism; and that without imparting anything vital himself, the confined
youth had adroitly pumped them of everything the Prague letter had contained.
Drs. Peck, Waite, and Lyman were not inclined to attach much importance to the strange
correspondence of young Ward‘s companion; for they knew the tendency of kindred
eccentrics and monomaniacs to band together, and believed that Charles or Allen had merely
unearthed an expatriated counterpart—perhaps one who had seen Orne‘s handwriting and
copied it in an attempt to pose as the bygone character‘s reincarnation. Allen himself was
perhaps a similar case, and may have persuaded the youth into accepting him as an avatar of
the long-dead Curwen. Such things had been known before, and on the same basis the hard-
headed doctors disposed of Willett‘s growing disquiet about Charles Ward‘s present
handwriting, as studied from unpremeditated specimens obtained by various ruses. Willett
thought he had placed its odd familiarity at last, and that what it vaguely resembled was the
bygone penmanship of old Joseph Curwen himself; but this the other physicians regarded as
a phase of imitativeness only to be expected in a mania of this sort, and refused to grant it
any importance either favourable or unfavourable. Recognising this prosaic attitude in his
colleagues, Willett advised Mr. Ward to keep to himself the letter which arrived for Dr. Allen on
the second of April from Rakus, Transylvania, in a handwriting so intensely and fundamentally
like that of the Hutchinson cipher that both father and physician paused in awe before
breaking the seal. This read as follows:
Castle Ferenczy
7 March 1928.
Dear C.:—Hadd a Squad of 20 Militia up to talk about what the Country Folk say.
Must digg deeper and have less Hearde. These Roumanians plague me damnably,
being officious and particular where you cou‘d buy a Magyar off with a Drinke and
ffood. Last monthe M. got me ye Sarcophagus of ye Five Sphinxes from ye
Acropolis where He whome I call‘d up say‘d it wou‘d be, and I have hadde 3 Talkes
with What was therein inhum’d. It will go to S. O. in Prague directly, and thence to
you. It is stubborn but you know ye Way with Such. You shew Wisdom in having
lesse about than Before; for there was no Neede to keep the Guards in Shape and
eat‘g off their Heads, and it made Much to be founde in Case of Trouble, as you
too welle knowe. You can now move and worke elsewhere with no Kill‘g Trouble if
needful, tho‘ I hope no Thing will soon force you to so Bothersome a Course. I
rejoice that you traffick not so much with Those Outside; for there was ever a
Mortall Peril in it, and you are sensible what it did when you ask‘d Protection of
One not dispos‘d to give it. You excel me in gett‘g ye fformulae so another may
saye them with Success, but Borellus fancy‘d it wou‘d be so if just ye right Wordes
were hadd. Does ye Boy use ‘em often? I regret that he growes squeamish, as I
fear‘d he wou‘d when I hadde him here nigh 15 Monthes, but am sensible you
knowe how to deal with him. You can‘t saye him down with ye fformula, for that will
Worke only upon such as ye other fformula hath call‘d up from Saltes; but you still
have strong Handes and Knife and Pistol, and Graves are not harde to digg, nor
Acids loth to burne. O. sayes you have promis‘d him B. F. I must have him after. B.
goes to you soone, and may he give you what you wishe of that Darke Thing
belowe Memphis. Imploy care in what you calle up, and beware of ye Boy. It will be
ripe in a yeare‘s time to have up ye Legions from Underneath, and then there are
no Boundes to what shal be oures. Have Confidence in what I saye, for you knowe
O. and I have hadd these 150 yeares more than you to consulte these Matters in.
Nephren-Ka nai Hadoth
Edw: H.
For J. Curwen, Esq.
Providence.
But if Willett and Mr. Ward refrained from shewing this letter to the alienists, they did not
refrain from acting upon it themselves. No amount of learned sophistry could controvert the
fact that the strangely bearded and spectacled Dr. Allen, of whom Charles‘s frantic letter had
spoken as such a monstrous menace, was in close and sinister correspondence with two
inexplicable creatures whom Ward had visited in his travels and who plainly claimed to be
survivals or avatars of Curwen‘s old Salem colleagues; that he was regarding himself as the
reincarnation of Joseph Curwen, and that he entertained—or was at least advised to
entertain—murderous designs against a ―boy‖ who could scarcely be other than Charles
Ward. There was organised horror afoot; and no matter who had started it, the missing Allen
was by this time at the bottom of it. Therefore, thanking heaven that Charles was now safe in
the hospital, Mr. Ward lost no time in engaging detectives to learn all they could of the cryptic
bearded doctor; finding whence he had come and what Pawtuxet knew of him, and if possible
discovering his current whereabouts. Supplying the men with one of the bungalow keys which
Charles yielded up, he urged them to explore Allen‘s vacant room which had been identified
when the patient‘s belongings had been packed; obtaining what clues they could from any
effects he might have left about. Mr. Ward talked with the detectives in his son‘s old library,
and they felt a marked relief when they left it at last; for there seemed to hover about the
place a vague aura of evil. Perhaps it was what they had heard of the infamous old wizard
whose picture had once stared from the panelled overmantel, and perhaps it was something
different and irrelevant; but in any case they all half sensed an intangible miasma which
centred in that carven vestige of an older dwelling and which at times almost rose to the
intensity of a material emanation.
V. A Nightmare and a Cataclysm
1.
And now swiftly followed that hideous experience which has left its indelible mark of fear on
the soul of Marinus Bicknell Willett, and has added a decade to the visible age of one whose
youth was even then far behind. Dr. Willett had conferred at length with Mr. Ward, and had
come to an agreement with him on several points which both felt the alienists would ridicule.
There was, they conceded, a terrible movement alive in the world, whose direct connexion
with a necromancy even older than the Salem witchcraft could not be doubted. That at least
two living men—and one other of whom they dared not think—were in absolute possession of
minds or personalities which had functioned as early as 1690 or before was likewise almost
unassailably proved even in the face of all known natural laws. What these horrible
creatures—and Charles Ward as well—were doing or trying to do seemed fairly clear from
their letters and from every bit of light both old and new which had filtered in upon the case.
They were robbing the tombs of all the ages, including those of the world‘s wisest and
greatest men, in the hope of recovering from the bygone ashes some vestige of the
consciousness and lore which had once animated and informed them.
A hideous traffick was going on among these nightmare ghouls, whereby illustrious bones
were bartered with the calm calculativeness of schoolboys swapping books; and from what
was extorted from this centuried dust there was anticipated a power and a wisdom beyond
anything which the cosmos had ever seen concentrated in one man or group. They had found
unholy ways to keep their brains alive, either in the same body or different bodies; and had
evidently achieved a way of tapping the consciousness of the dead whom they gathered
together. There had, it seems, been some truth in chimerical old Borellus when he wrote of
preparing from even the most antique remains certain ―Essential Saltes‖ from which the shade
of a long-dead living thing might be raised up. There was a formula for evoking such a shade,
and another for putting it down; and it had now been so perfected that it could be taught
successfully. One must be careful about evocations, for the markers of old graves are not
always accurate.
Willett and Mr. Ward shivered as they passed from conclusion to conclusion. Things—
presences or voices of some sort—could be drawn down from unknown places as well as
from the grave, and in this process also one must be careful. Joseph Curwen had indubitably
evoked many forbidden things, and as for Charles—what might one think of him? What forces
―outside the spheres‖ had reached him from Joseph Curwen‘s day and turned his mind on
forgotten things? He had been led to find certain directions, and he had used them. He had
talked with the man of horror in Prague and stayed long with the creature in the mountains of
Transylvania. And he must have found the grave of Joseph Curwen at last. That newspaper
item and what his mother had heard in the night were too significant to overlook. Then he had
summoned something, and it must have come. That mighty voice aloft on Good Friday, and
those different tones in the locked attic laboratory. What were they like, with their depth and
hollowness? Was there not here some awful foreshadowing of the dreaded stranger Dr. Allen
with his spectral bass? Yes, that was what Mr. Ward had felt with vague horror in his single
talk with the man—if man it were—over the telephone!
What hellish consciousness or voice, what morbid shade or presence, had come to answer
Charles Ward‘s secret rites behind that locked door? Those voices heard in argument—―must
have it red for three months‖—Good God! Was not that just before the vampirism broke out?
The rifling of Ezra Weeden‘s ancient grave, and the cries later at Pawtuxet—whose mind had
planned the vengeance and rediscovered the shunned seat of elder blasphemies? And then
the bungalow and the bearded stranger, and the gossip, and the fear. The final madness of
Charles neither father nor doctor could attempt to explain, but they did feel sure that the mind
of Joseph Curwen had come to earth again and was following its ancient morbidities. Was
daemoniac possession in truth a possibility? Allen had something to do with it, and the
detectives must find out more about one whose existence menaced the young man‘s life. In
the meantime, since the existence of some vast crypt beneath the bungalow seemed virtually
beyond dispute, some effort must be made to find it. Willett and Mr. Ward, conscious of the
sceptical attitude of the alienists, resolved during their final conference to undertake a joint
secret exploration of unparalleled thoroughness; and agreed to meet at the bungalow on the
following morning with valises and with certain tools and accessories suited to architectural
search and underground exploration.
The morning of April 6th dawned clear, and both explorers were at the bungalow by ten
o‘clock. Mr. Ward had the key, and an entry and cursory survey were made. From the
disordered condition of Dr. Allen‘s room it was obvious that the detectives had been there
before, and the later searchers hoped that they had found some clue which might prove of
value. Of course the main business lay in the cellar; so thither they descended without much
delay, again making the circuit which each had vainly made before in the presence of the mad
young owner. For a time everything seemed baffling, each inch of the earthen floor and stone
walls having so solid and innocuous an aspect that the thought of a yawning aperture was
scarcely to be entertained. Willett reflected that since the original cellar was dug without
knowledge of any catacombs beneath, the beginning of the passage would represent the
strictly modern delving of young Ward and his associates, where they had probed for the
ancient vaults whose rumour could have reached them by no wholesome means.
The doctor tried to put himself in Charles‘s place to see how a delver would be likely to start,
but could not gain much inspiration from this method. Then he decided on elimination as a
policy, and went carefully over the whole subterranean surface both vertical and horizontal,
trying to account for every inch separately. He was soon substantially narrowed down, and at
last had nothing left but the small platform before the washtubs, which he had tried once
before in vain. Now experimenting in every possible way, and exerting a double strength, he
finally found that the top did indeed turn and slide horizontally on a corner pivot. Beneath it lay
a trim concrete surface with an iron manhole, to which Mr. Ward at once rushed with excited
zeal. The cover was not hard to lift, and the father had quite removed it when Willett noticed
the queerness of his aspect. He was swaying and nodding dizzily, and in the gust of noxious
air which swept up from the black pit beneath the doctor soon recognised ample cause.
In a moment Dr. Willett had his fainting companion on the floor above and was reviving him
with cold water. Mr. Ward responded feebly, but it could be seen that the mephitic blast from
the crypt had in some way gravely sickened him. Wishing to take no chances, Willett
hastened out to Broad Street for a taxicab and had soon dispatched the sufferer home despite
his weak-voiced protests; after which he produced an electric torch, covered his nostrils with a
band of sterile gauze, and descended once more to peer into the new-found depths. The foul
air had now slightly abated, and Willett was able to send a beam of light down the Stygian
hole. For about ten feet, he saw, it was a sheer cylindrical drop with concrete walls and an
iron ladder; after which the hole appeared to strike a flight of old stone steps which must
originally have emerged to earth somewhat southwest of the present building.
2.
Willett freely admits that for a moment the memory of the old Curwen legends kept him from
climbing down alone into that malodorous gulf. He could not help thinking of what Luke
Fenner had reported on that last monstrous night. Then duty asserted itself and he made the
plunge, carrying a great valise for the removal of whatever papers might prove of supreme
importance. Slowly, as befitted one of his years, he descended the ladder and reached the
slimy steps below. This was ancient masonry, his torch told him; and upon the dripping walls
he saw the unwholesome moss of centuries. Down, down, ran the steps; not spirally, but in
three abrupt turns; and with such narrowness that two men could have passed only with
difficulty. He had counted about thirty when a sound reached him very faintly; and after that he
did not feel disposed to count any more.
It was a godless sound; one of those low-keyed, insidious outrages of Nature which are not
meant to be. To call it a dull wail, a doom-dragged whine, or a hopeless howl of chorused
anguish and stricken flesh without mind would be to miss its most quintessential
loathsomeness and soul-sickening overtones. Was it for this that Ward had seemed to listen
on that day he was removed? It was the most shocking thing that Willett had ever heard, and
it continued from no determinate point as the doctor reached the bottom of the steps and cast
his torchlight around on lofty corridor walls surmounted by Cyclopean vaulting and pierced by
numberless black archways. The hall in which he stood was perhaps fourteen feet high to the
middle of the vaulting and ten or twelve feet broad. Its pavement was of large chipped
flagstones, and its walls and roof were of dressed masonry. Its length he could not imagine,
for it stretched ahead indefinitely into the blackness. Of the archways, some had doors of the
old six-panelled colonial type, whilst others had none.
Overcoming the dread induced by the smell and the howling, Willett began to explore these
archways one by one; finding beyond them rooms with groined stone ceilings, each of
medium size and apparently of bizarre uses. Most of them had fireplaces, the upper courses
of whose chimneys would have formed an interesting study in engineering. Never before or
since had he seen such instruments or suggestions of instruments as here loomed up on
every hand through the burying dust and cobwebs of a century and a half, in many cases
evidently shattered as if by the ancient raiders. For many of the chambers seemed wholly
untrodden by modern feet, and must have represented the earliest and most obsolete phases
of Joseph Curwen‘s experimentation. Finally there came a room of obvious modernity, or at
least of recent occupancy. There were oil heaters, bookshelves and tables, chairs and
cabinets, and a desk piled high with papers of varying antiquity and contemporaneousness.
Candlesticks and oil lamps stood about in several places; and finding a match-safe handy,
Willett lighted such as were ready for use.
In the fuller gleam it appeared that this apartment was nothing less than the latest study or
library of Charles Ward. Of the books the doctor had seen many before, and a good part of
the furniture had plainly come from the Prospect Street mansion. Here and there was a piece
well known to Willett, and the sense of familiarity became so great that he half forgot the
noisomeness and the wailing, both of which were plainer here than they had been at the foot
of the steps. His first duty, as planned long ahead, was to find and seize any papers which
might seem of vital importance; especially those portentous documents found by Charles so
long ago behind the picture in Olney Court. As he searched he perceived how stupendous a
task the final unravelling would be; for file on file was stuffed with papers in curious hands and
bearing curious designs, so that months or even years might be needed for a thorough
deciphering and editing. Once he found large packets of letters with Prague and Rakus
postmarks, and in writing clearly recognisable as Orne‘s and Hutchinson‘s; all of which he
took with him as part of the bundle to be removed in his valise.
At last, in a locked mahogany cabinet once gracing the Ward home, Willett found the batch of
old Curwen papers; recognising them from the reluctant glimpse Charles had granted him so
many years ago. The youth had evidently kept them together very much as they had been
when first he found them, since all the titles recalled by the workmen were present except the
papers addressed to Orne and Hutchinson, and the cipher with its key. Willett placed the
entire lot in his valise and continued his examination of the files. Since young Ward‘s
immediate condition was the greatest matter at stake, the closest searching was done among
the most obviously recent matter; and in this abundance of contemporary manuscript one
very baffling oddity was noted. The oddity was the slight amount in Charles‘s normal writing,
which indeed included nothing more recent than two months before. On the other hand, there
were literally reams of symbols and formulae, historical notes and philosophical comment, in
a crabbed penmanship absolutely identical with the ancient script of Joseph Curwen, though
of undeniably modern dating. Plainly, a part of the latter-day programme had been a sedulous
imitation of the old wizard‘s writing, which Charles seemed to have carried to a marvellous
state of perfection. Of any third hand which might have been Allen‘s there was not a trace. If
he had indeed come to be the leader, he must have forced young Ward to act as his
amanuensis.
In this new material one mystic formula, or rather pair of formulae, recurred so often that
Willett had it by heart before he had half finished his quest. It consisted of two parallel
columns, the left-hand one surmounted by the archaic symbol called ―Dragon‘s Head‖ and
used in almanacks to indicate the ascending node, and the right-hand one headed by a
corresponding sign of ―Dragon‘s Tail‖ or descending node. The appearance of the whole was
something like this, and almost unconsciously the doctor realised that the second half was no
more than the first written syllabically backward with the exception of the final monosyllables
and of the odd name Yog-Sothoth, which he had come to recognise under various spellings
from other things he had seen in connexion with this horrible matter. The formulae were as
follows—exactly so, as Willett is abundantly able to testify—and the first one struck an odd
note of uncomfortable latent memory in his brain, which he recognised later when reviewing
the events of that horrible Good Friday of the previous year.
Y‘AI ‘NG‘NGAH,
YOG-SOTHOTH
H‘EE—L‘GEB
F‘AI THRODOG
UAAAH
OGTHROD AI‘F
GEB‘L—EE‘H
YOG-SOTHOTH
‘NGAH‘NG AI‘Y
ZHRO
So haunting were these formulae, and so frequently did he come upon them, that before the
doctor knew it he was repeating them under his breath. Eventually, however, he felt he had
secured all the papers he could digest to advantage for the present; hence resolved to
examine no more till he could bring the sceptical alienists en masse for an ampler and more
systematic raid. He had still to find the hidden laboratory, so leaving his valise in the lighted
room he emerged again into the black noisome corridor whose vaulting echoed ceaselessly
with that dull and hideous whine.
The next few rooms he tried were all abandoned, or filled only with crumbling boxes and
ominous-looking leaden coffins; but impressed him deeply with the magnitude of Joseph
Curwen‘s original operations. He thought of the slaves and seamen who had disappeared, of
the graves which had been violated in every part of the world, and of what that final raiding
party must have seen; and then he decided it was better not to think any more. Once a great
stone staircase mounted at his right, and he deduced that this must have reached to one of
the Curwen outbuildings—perhaps the famous stone edifice with the high slit-like windows—
provided the steps he had descended had led from the steep-roofed farmhouse. Suddenly the
walls seemed to fall away ahead, and the stench and the wailing grew stronger. Willett saw
that he had come upon a vast open space, so great that his torchlight would not carry across
it; and as he advanced he encountered occasional stout pillars supporting the arches of the
roof.
After a time he reached a circle of pillars grouped like the monoliths of Stonehenge, with a
large carved altar on a base of three steps in the centre; and so curious were the carvings on
that altar that he approached to study them with his electric light. But when he saw what they
were he shrank away shuddering, and did not stop to investigate the dark stains which
discoloured the upper surface and had spread down the sides in occasional thin lines.
Instead, he found the distant wall and traced it as it swept round in a gigantic circle perforated
by occasional black doorways and indented by a myriad of shallow cells with iron gratings and
wrist and ankle bonds on chains fastened to the stone of the concave rear masonry. These
cells were empty, but still the horrible odour and the dismal moaning continued, more insistent
now than ever, and seemingly varied at times by a sort of slippery thumping.